I was lost in a drift. [music] And
really what I first wanted to do was to
take my life.
Steven,
he's a comedian, an actor, and a
national treasure.
He's a director. He's a writer. I I'll
probably miss things out.
Master of language, and for nights, my
night.
I was a deeply difficult child. My
parents sent me to a psychiatrist when I
was 14. I started doing weird things. I
was sent to prison.
So the best I could do after a
disastrous childhood I decided was now
concentrate on getting into Cambridge.
That changed everything.
Ladies and gentlemen, Steven Fry.
I want to please people and if I don't
please them, I get upset. [music] I I've
done it wrong.
Age 37, you star in a play. The play
gets some pretty harsh reviews.
I [music] was lost in a drift and really
what I first wanted to do was to take my
life. Steven vanished on Monday, leaving
a number of letters for friends. [music]
That started my journey into my mental
health.
When you were 55, it was your third
suicide attempt,
afraid. So, that's right.
Can you take me back [music] to that
moment?
Before this episode starts, I have a
small favor to ask from you. 2 months
ago, 74% of people that watch this
channel didn't subscribe. We're now down
to 69%.
My goal is 50%. So, if you've ever liked
any of the videos we've posted, if you
like this channel, can you do me a quick
favor and hit the subscribe button?
Thank you and enjoy this episode.
[music]
[singing]
I'm I'm so fascinated by um people's
foundations, their earliest years, their
context, because it seems so apparent
that that ends up shaping who we are and
who we become and our orientation in
life. So, as I read through your story
in your earliest years, it was it was an
unthinkable roller coaster ride of
twists and turns. But what do I need to
know about about Steven Fry's earliest
years to understand the man that sat in
front of me? Well,
to use the language of the time, I was a
disruptive,
deeply difficult, screwed up child.
That's kind of the language they used
then. And I think to give myself some I
won't say credit, I would probably in
later years have been diagnosed as
having attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder. I was extremely [snorts]
difficult to keep still and I found it
hard to focus. I was I'll say um vain as
it may sound I think um intellectually
advanced for my age. I was very quick
with language and with speech um and
just seeing things and remembering
things in particular. So I never had to
revise and so in that sense I had a lot
of spare time. But on the other hand,
socially and where it matters to a
child, I I never fitted in or felt
fitted in because I was bad at all the
things that are valued when you're a
child. I I couldn't catch a ball. You
know, I sort of did the the sort of
uncoordinated hand clapping method of
trying to catch, which is always mocked
like just as you've done. [laughter] And
the cry of uncleo would follow me, short
for uncoordinated and worse. kind of
words we certainly don't use now to
describe a shall [snorts] we say a
dyspraxic um figure in terms of you know
physicality. I was just you know I was
growing too fast and too tall and very
thin hard to imagine now. Um and I
wasn't musically very gifted
particularly. [snorts] Uh and I couldn't
draw. So all I had was my passion for
language and and I loved it and I played
with it and I told stories and I tried
to make myself
less unpopular, put it that way, by by
it was a boarding school. I I was sent
away at the age of seven in Britain
which is not a huge country. It's about
as far as you can be from home though.
My parents were in Norfolk on the east
coast and I was sent to Gstershare on
the west um uh to a a prep school from
the age of as I say seven which to some
people sounds a bit cruel and weird to
send a seven-year-old boy 200 miles from
home and just have them there. But you
have to remember two things. One,
that was what happened as far as I was
concerned. My father had gone to a
similar school. My mother had bought it
since she was four. Um uh but that was
because she was a Jewish refugee in in
in England and her father wanted to hide
her away from the impending Nazi
invasion. And so that that that was a
particular reason. [snorts] But my
brother had gone at that age and of
course by definition everyone at the
school was in the same boat. So you just
thought that's what happened. I mean, if
you take a child and put them in a
cupboard between half 2 and 3 in the
afternoon and um shout at them through
the keyhole every day, they'll just
think, "Oh, that's what happens."
[laughter] You know, and then you
welcome them out and give them a big hug
and say, "That was your cupboard time."
[laughter]
You know what I mean? Anything you do to
a child regularly is the normal world
essentially.
Uh until they see other children having
a different experience. But so class
locked I guess I was without really
noticing it. Grew up in the countryside
in a large house not down to Abbey but
you know we had gardeners and people
coming in to clean and that sort of
thing. Servants I suppose staff whatever
word you want to use. Um and it was deep
in the countryside and the other boys
that I knew very few girls but I did I
did know girls and even they went away
to school. So all the boys I knew were
going away to school and the parents you
met say when are you going off to prep
school then Stevens I go when I'm seven
and they go very good and that was it
because I didn't know any other
children. I mean that sounds monstrous
but that's just the way things were. You
stuck to your own. Um it it wasn't
outright snobbery or anything. It just
was this was the world into which I was
born. So you don't really question it
particularly. [snorts]
And through most of my prep school time,
age 7 to 13 is a prep school in in
Britain, I was very disruptive, I passed
exams very easily. I tried as hard as I
could to get out of any form of physical
activity. I gave myself asthma attacks
and all the rest of it in order to be
put off games because I just hated the
particularly rugby and the muddy cold
horrible things running and the
collision of bodies and bones and was
just so vile. [snorts] Um I wanted to
sit and read a book, you know,
[laughter] by the side of the field and
humor particularly then as I moved to 13
and went to the big school, you know,
the public school as it's known, though
of course they're not anything but
public, they're private. Um, and that
that was scary because it's 600 boys um
rather than the prep school's 90s. So,
it's a much less of a little nest and
much more of a who but I was 13. And so,
when you're 13, as you know too well,
chemicals starts start to boil and
bubble inside you and things begin to
happen in your mind and soul. And um I
was not prepared for the astonishing
cataclysm, the catastrophe, the glorious
catastrophe of love. It had never
occurred to me that it was it would be
what it was. Which is silly because we
grow up hearing nothing but love songs.
What did the Beatles do? Go on about
love me do and please me and and money
come by love and hold my hand and
everything's a love song. And suddenly
when you fall in love, all those lyrics
make sense and you realize there's
nothing else in the world and nothing
else is even slightly as important. And
[snorts] of course I was in love with
another boy and I was aware that that
was probably not the right thing. And it
it threw me out of everything really. I
I just stopped being able even to
pretend to be a normal well- behaved
school boy. I I started doing weird
things like climbing the roofs of all
the buildings, the big chapels and
churches and uh classrooms. And so that
was the first school from which I was
expelled. I'm going to compress the
story because it gets kind of
goes on and on and on. I was then
expelled from another one and then kind
of another one and then I left and went
to London. Left home, went to London and
the the [clears throat] major problem
there was I was in a pub. It was getting
a bit chilly. I saw a coat, liked the
look of it,
half inched it, stole it, and left the
pub and then discovered there was a
wallet in it. Oh my goodness. And two
credit cards.
So I went absolutely nuts around Britain
with these credit cards, staying in
grand hotels, buying things, and
traveling and so on. In those days, they
didn't even have magnetic strips on the
back of credit cards for for you know
that you just have to roll them on a
piece of carbon to to to take an
imprint. So there was it was very easy
to use them fraudulently as long as you
looked vaguely convincing.
I I was aware because my father had once
lost his Barkley card that it was the
bank that paid, not the poor fellow
whose cards I'd stolen. So I didn't feel
guilty in that rather pathetic way we do
when we try and square our dishonesty,
you know. Um [snorts]
Eventually I ended up in Swindon of all
unlikely towns. I think I was going to
meet a school friend and the idea we was
going to go to the Reading Festival. Um
so
I stayed in the hotel in Swindon and
that's when uh a couple of I got back to
my room having been shopping. There were
a couple of men in the room which I
thought was rather weird. Uh and being
used to hotels by this time I assumed
they were like cleaning or maintenance
people. I said no it's all right. Don't
need anything. And then then then said
my name only not my name the name that
was the name of the fellow whose credit
cards I had stolen. Let's say his name
is Smith. So they said Mr. Smith and I
went yes and they said Wiltshire CD held
up there. [laughter]
Jesus.
And suddenly I realized the the jig was
on. I was sent to prison uh on remand. I
was sent to a young person's institution
on remand while they waited. There were
seven counties, I think, that had
paperwork that I traveled in with these
cards that had to be caught up with. Um,
you're 18.
Uh, 17. Just turning 18. That's right.
Yeah. by this time
at the so it was interesting because I
was reading about your as
[clears throat] I read through those
first 18 years of your life I saw
someone with clearly huge intellectual
potential but also which doesn't seem to
be very common with someone who exhibits
those qualities someone who was kind of
like rebelling against society had this
sort of I think in your own words an
addiction to stealing things
um and is that and I couldn't quite
figure out why but I'm what what am I
understanding now is because it comes
back to that feeling of being an
outsider and kind of rebelling against
the society that you weren't able to fit
into.
I think that's exactly right. And I I my
parents did send me to a psychiatrist
when I was 14 15. He [snorts] was oddly
enough a member of parliament and a
junior health minister as well as a
psychiatrist. Um so a very grand Harley
Street office, you know, with one of
those enormous mlong fountain pens the
size of a small submarine with which it
slowly writes things down. and uh he was
slightly annoyed my parents weren't uh
in the diplomatic service because the
apparently the way I behaved and the and
the things I did were very typical of
people from unsettled families. Yeah.
Um and you know constantly moving and
and so on. But he he prescribed me
something and later I found out when I
was doing a documentary about mental
health and I went all the way back to my
school and spoke to my old school
master. He had a copy of a letter from
that psychiatrist in which the
psychiatrist had written bipolar
question mark uh which I knew nothing
about at the time. That was when I was
15. So there was clearly some mental
they recognized there was a mental kink
if you like. [snorts] 100 years earlier
it would have been called a moral kink.
Basically they're just saying he's he's
a bad lot you know but uh we were on our
way to being more understanding about
children's behavior. But yeah, it's that
whole mixture of my love of literature
and stories and wanting to be involved
in the in the world of ideas desperately
to learn more and to understand more and
to share ideas. Um, uh, a cheap wish
watching Parkinson every Saturday night
to be famous, but not sure how how that
could happen. It seemed absurd.
And [snorts]
a deep deep like a like hot lead leaking
in the stomach whenever I contemplated
my sexuality. this feeling because all I
I read and read and read around it. You
know, you go to a library in those days,
of course, there was no worldwide web.
So, you use what was known as the
bibliography at the at the back of a
book which would recommend other books
that were sources for that book. And so,
you would build a web of connections of
so I read a biography of Oscar Wild and
that led me to biographies of other
figures in his circle and other figures
later and so on. And I saw there was
this extraordinary tradition of literary
artistic people um who were who were
queer as we'd say now. And of course the
ones I was reading about were were were
born in mostly into an elite part of the
society that allowed them to go and live
in North Africa or Italy or Greece or
somewhere where it wasn't quite so dark
and you know oppressive. uh uh but the
average person, you know, who was born
queer uh had a a miserable outcome. It
was illegal and you [snorts] police
would uh treat you dreadfully and
newspaper articles and and so I saw
ahead of me a life of shame and secrecy
and all abstinence and you know sorrow
and just you know there was no possible
way the world would be open and free for
me. It would just be the best I could
do. After a disastrous childhood, I
decided in prison was now concentrate on
getting into Cambridge, become an
academic, forget anything about the
world because the world wasn't for me.
And that would be enough. And it would
also repay my parents for the
extraordinary stress and distress I' I'd
given them. And so I uh when I was put
on probation finally at the end of the
prison thing having served quite a bit
in remand I was just put on two years
probation went home told my parents I
would look after myself entirely got
jobs got myself a moped went into
Norwich did a course and amazingly got a
scholarship to Cambridge Austria. Yeah.
So that changed everything.
It is the most remarkable
turn I think that I've ever I've ever
seen in someone's life. I think I've
never seen someone who has a series of
sort of criminal um engagements, gets
expelled from school multiple times. I
read at 17 there there was a suicide
attempt after an argument with your
father.
That's right.
Which led you to be in hospital as well.
You end up in jail and then from jail
you go to Cambridge. [laughter]
It doesn't seem like that. didn't seem
normal. And while I was at Cambridge for
the first year, I was on probation
still.
Jesus.
I remember saying to to to one of my
tutors or supervisors, I I said, "Oh,
look at the date." I said, "Uh, I'm no
longer on probation." And he said, "You
weren't on probation." Thinking I meant
some sort of academic probation, you
know, that I hadn't done good enough
essays and that I was being given a
warning that I better work harder. He
said, "You're not on probation?" I said,
"Well, actually, I am." [laughter] I
told him, he said, "What the hell?" kick
out. Why didn't you tell us? I said,
well, why didn't you ask me? [laughter]
They never they never asked. So, but it
is extraordinary how everything turned
because you know in the first kind of
week I met Emma Thompson who was an
undergraduate reading the same subject
English and I then saw her in a play and
I was just knocked out. I couldn't
believe it. I had considered maybe I
should do some acting at Cambridge. I
started doing that and really enjoyed
it, but did lots of other plays as well.
And I wrote a play [snorts] called
Latin. It was a a comedy and that went
to Edinburgh and it won a prize and and
Emma um came to see it and brought
someone along to watch it that she
thought um might enjoy it. And I didn't
remember this experience, but that
person was Hugh Lori and he apparently
came and watched the play and and said
hello briefly. Then at the end of my
second year, I was approached by Emma
who said, "I'm going to come around and
introduce you to Hugh. There you have
met him." And I said, "No, I haven't."
And she said, "Yes, you have." Um,
anyway, she took me over to his college
and knocked on the door and the door
opened. He was sitting on the bed with a
guitar in his lap and he said, "Hello."
And I said, "Hello." And his girlfriend
was there making a cup of tea and he
said, "I'm just writing a song." and he
started to play a bit the verse of the
song and I said, "Oh, it's fabulous."
And I sat down next to him. We started
to work on on the lyrics of it and I
added some ideas and then we'd you built
it up into three or four verses in the
choruses and the song was finished and
then he picked up a piece of paper and
we started to write a sketch and Emma
and Katie were just staring at us,
what's happened? We didn't, you know, we
barely didn't ask each other our names.
We just immediately just fitted. I'm
sliding my fingers into each other there
to give an example. Um it it was I I
described it as like falling in love but
a platonic comedy love. Um we just
seemed to gel straight away. It was most
extraordinary. So from that moment on,
we started writing stuff together um for
our show and I thinking that either I
was going to stay at Cambridge to be an
academic or maybe I was going to go to a
drama school afterwards and join the
Royal Shakespeare Society and hold
[snorts] spears and um bellow speeches.
Uh, and now there was this strange
possibility of using comedy as a as a a
way of going forward and maybe not
staying at Cambridge at all, but trying
to, you know, tread the boards in an
amusing way.
Why acting? [sighs]
I I s I sat here with Maisie Williams,
who's the the young Game of Thrones
actress.
Indeed. I know who you mean. Yeah.
Yeah. And I I find, you know, and then I
read this book called um the body holds
the score and it talks about
six ways that we can help our mental
health and things like yoga and all
these kinds of things, but one of them
is acting. And it talks about the role
that act, you know, this kind of
separation from identity and how that
can be liberating and wonderful. And
when I when I heard you describe your
first acting experiences, you use words
like blissful and amazing
[clears throat] and and as if you'd
found your place in the world. True. I
mean it is also it is the
acknowledgement the the love or the
sense of attention you get from an
audience that you're uh it's not I mean
of course it's a kind of vanity but it's
not that you want to be praised exactly.
It's just you want to experience that
moment and keep experiencing it. It's
not oh look you must write marvelous
things about me or come up after the
show and tell me I'm a genius. That's
all embarrassing. What? But but the
moment you're on stage and you feel that
people are looking at you and not
admiring you, Steven, but that they are
you have won them over. They are
following the story of the character you
are and they are sucked up into it and
you've made it. It's a wonderful
feeling. But something even more primal
than that because I can remember when I
was very young, five maybe, and my
brother was seven, going to a pantomime
in Norfolk and the usual thing happened.
buttons comes out and goes, "Hello, boys
and girls. Who'd like to come up on
stage with me now and sing a song?" My
brother dived under the seat and made
noises like a piece of dust so that no
one would notice him like most children.
He was damned if he was going to get up
and make an exhibition of himself in
public. But I stood on my tiptoes with
my arm up so high that I nearly split
the membranes of my underarm, you know,
going me. And we both had the same
parents. We both have the same DNA, more
or less. Not identical. We're not
identical twins, but I mean really,
we're pretty similar in terms of our
birth and and our parentage and and
environmental upbringing. And yet, he
would rather have cut his arm off than
go on stage. And I would cut my arm off
in order to go on stage. And that's just
something that was built in. And that
was when I was yet too young to be
self-conscious to have if you like those
kind of issues of selfworth and uh um
you know wanting to lose myself
somewhere else. It was just a a young
showoffy I want to be up there. That's
you know you see a stage you want to be
on it. much of what you say about the
the mental health aspect is true, but it
is also the case and I'm sure you've
[snorts] sort of heard stories about
this that even when you're in a very
long running play, when you're in the
wings for the first night, you know,
there is you are trembling, you are
white, your heart rate is really up and
and you step on stage and you do it. But
the weird thing is six months later if
it's a long run, you're standing in the
wings, you're you're talking to the
stage management people like that.
You're going, "Yeah, oh yeah, yeah, I'll
see you after this scene." And you go
on. Doctors have done this. They've
wired people up. Your heart rate is as
high on that night as it would have been
on the first night. It's just you've got
used to it. Um the comparison, and it's
not a comparison of quality or value, is
with an RAF pilot. every day they
they're they're flying up like that and
and it's they love it. They just made
for it. I mean, it's frightening and
they hate to see their companions killed
and and and so on. But the awful thing
is when it stops.
Suddenly the war's over. Every single
day you were in a spitfire. You were
facing death. You were doing such
amazing things. And now there's nothing.
And similarly in a long play, of course,
it's nothing like being in the Air
Force. It's of no importance to anybody
except other people. But nonetheless, it
does cause the similar kind of shakes in
your body and the excitement. And then
that's the end of the run. Stop. And it
does explain, I think, a lot of the
substance abuse, you know, the
addictions and the kind of unhappinesses
and breakdowns and short-term marriages
and and and relationships that that are
also common in the acting world. I mean
it may be [snorts] true that there is
something good for mental health but I
don't think anybody would say that as a
group actors exhibit mental health of a
of a of a happier and better kind than
than other groups of people. Um so so
you know it's it's it's a complicated
story really isn't it?
It's so interesting that that sort of
anti-limax I think we've referred to
that before as like gold medal
depression. We [snorts] we tend to set
ourselves goals of if only I could live
in that kind of a village in you know in
the south of England like a quite near a
station and nice little house but not
too expensive and yeah and then you get
it and so yeah you live in the suburbs.
Hooray. Um, oh, oh, maybe that car, that
that new one there, that Tesla or
whatever, I'll get a then I'll be happy.
That you don't literally say then I'll
be happy, but there's a kind of sense of
that's all I really want. [snorts] And
each of these goals is met and it isn't
it as the the line of TS Elliot, that's
not it. That's not it at all. And and we
go through life thinking that's not it.
That's not it at all. There is something
in all of us, a whole a need for
connection and love and truth and and a
sense of something beautiful beyond. And
we can if you're religious, you call it
heaven. And if you're a humanist, you
you you know, you call it a full and
achieved life um of of friendship and
you know, elements of sacrifice and so
on. But you know, you know that there's
a hope for it. But but if you if you
mislabel it and think that it's
connected with money or cars or
mortgages or jobs or status, you're
never happy because of your status,
because of things you've achieved. You
happiness comes from
somewhere else. And of course, I've yet
to meet anyone who can tell you where it
comes from regularly, where it can be
tapped like some resourced art. That's
where you get your happiness. We know
there's fake happiness from a
a blow of a drug or something like that.
And that couldn't be a more fake
happiness. Um, and there's the happiness
of sitting around a table with friends.
That's beautiful fleeting moments with
friends and family where it's all
working and people aren't shouting at
each other and you can just look at each
other. I I I was at a memorial service
and for a very dear friend, the composer
Leslie Brickus, you know, who wrote
Feeling Good and uh Pure Imagination for
Willy Wonker and Goldfinger and a lot of
great songs. He was an amazing
songwriter [snorts] and uh and I
remembered I had this diary entry when I
was just getting to know him where they
there was a party. I think it was his
birthday and it was full of people, some
of whom super famous and extraordinary
people. But [snorts] he I remember just
catching sight of him and thinking he
looked so like a Persian cat just
looking from one friend to another with
this huge smile on his face just being
happy to have his friends around him.
It's a simple thing and yet it's the
best thing and and we chase we chase
things that give us less time to see our
friends. We we we we we chase work
targets and we chase journeys and
holidays and things with individuals and
so on. But and I think we grow away from
it. I think the older you get the the
the less you appreciate friendship,
which is really sad. When you're in your
20ies, you tend to do things as a group.
You go on holidays as a group because
you haven't yet got married and
partnered off and paired off. So, I
don't know if you agree with me, but I
do think maybe that one of the one of
the jobs of getting older, well, I'm
convinced that one of the jobs of
getting older is not to become
nullled, you know, like a tree. When a
tree is young, you can bend it. It's,
you know, a green stick as they call it.
You can bend it and shape it and so on.
But once it gets old, you know, and it
starts getting that bark and if you
tried to bend it, it would snap and and
we become a bit like that. Coming back
to the the the first point you said
there about the goals we should be
striving for. I found that really
interesting. If not if not striving for
a gold medal or this thing or that
thing, how does someone, you know,
listening to this now, what kind of
goals do you think would protect them
against that gold medal depression? What
kind of orientation?
It's an interesting point and of course
I I I you know obviously understand that
there are people who need to meet goals
in order to pay debts and you know that
there are certain amounts of money they
have to have to pay for their heating
and their mortgage and all all the rest
of it. And I'm obviously not suggesting
that that's valless because you need to
keep a roof over your head and
everything else. But in terms of one's
own personal sense of fulfillment and
self-worth and achievement,
um, [snorts] I'm more and more convinced
that it comes from how you treat people
and how they treat you back and how you
how you try to be a better person. I
know it sounds really silly. I'm not a
religious figure at all. Um, but but I'm
very interested in religions. Um, and I
can understand that in some cases
religions help cement a sense of
community.
I where I don't like it is where it's
exclusive of course where you have to
buy into a certain set of ideas and
so-called truths in order to be part of
that community. But I can understand how
looking at a wider sense of of life and
it's really about when you're falling
asleep at night and this may just be me.
Can I fall asleep at night and feel I've
been a reasonably okay person that day.
Is this someone I have to apologize to
next morning? Did I was I short and
sharp with someone? Was I a bit mean?
Was I lazy? Did I did I lie and because
I wanted my own way there? Um and and
it's not suggesting I'm a saint and I
always manage it to but I do have a very
loud voice in my head. Philosophers call
it a deontic or deentological voice.
This sense of obligation that is a
peculiarity it seems of our species as
far as we know. The image I always used
because they look so cheerful. An
Amazonian tree frog perched on a branch
with its big grin
isn't thinking, "Oh god, I was a
terrible Amazonian tree frog yesterday.
I really let myself down. I was mean. I
was unkind. I must try to be a better
Amazonian tree frog." What we admire
about animals is they spend 100% of
every day being themselves.
And we as humans are fully aware that we
don't. We are not fully ourselves. We
lie. We hide behind, we pretend, we fail
and we judge ourselves. Now that
peculiarity of humanity has tried,
people have tried to explain it in
different ways. Obviously, the genesis
myth is that it we at a fruit. It gave
us the knowledge of good and evil and
the sense of shame of our physical
selves. or or all those things that
separate us from animals. Because humans
since we were cognitively conscious have
been aware that we're animals because we
can see that we defecate and eat and
sleep and mate just like other animals
and sometimes very quite close to the
other animals if we depending what part
of the world we live. [snorts] But we
can also see that we have these other
things that animals don't. Who gave them
to us? Where did they come from? What do
they mean? And how do we live up to
them? Are they a curse or a blessing? Do
they make us mini gods? Or do they make
us the play things of gods? A cruel kind
of, you know, little as flies to wanting
boys to the gods are we? They kill us
for their sport as Webster put it. And
you know so and and those that's those
oldest questions still still really
obsess us particularly [clears throat]
now of course because in the age of AI
we we are able to be gods ourselves. We
we we are making sentient beings and we
will have to decide whether like the
Greek gods we give them fire or deny
them fire and um maybe they'll kill us.
But will they have what we have? This
sense of I try to be good. I mean, you
try to be good, don't you?
Try my best.
Yeah, I fail.
Yeah, you fail. It's right. And and and
we all like that, but we don't pay much
attention to that. And yet, it's the
most extraordinary thing about us. It
really is. and and and um as I say I'm
you know I'm I'm not a moral I'm not a
model of [snorts] moral property and uh
um rectitude of any kind but I do have a
that loud voice and I've always had it I
when I was a when my grandfather died
and this is [laughter] very but and I
first learned to play with myself I was
terrified that he was watching me
because he died and I thought I can't do
this because my granddad is watching me
and it's just awful.
And in a sense that in there you have it
in one image. That's what humanity has
been cursed with since our birth. the
big daddy in the sky is watching you and
is and making you self-conscious and
you're holding back from your true
nature because oh I can't do that in
front [laughter] of God, you know, and
um somehow we have to square that and
give ourselves permission to be who we
were born to be and allow ourselves to
live the full lives that we feel that
we're on a journey to. But accept also
that we will feel that we let ourselves
down and that we're guilty of this and
guilty of that. It's a, you know, very
tempting to be more like, you know,
someone like Samuel Beckett and the
absurdists and just say there is no
meaning to any of this. It's absurd.
Life is absurd and meaningless. I know
very well that in in philosophy there
are very very few professional
philosophers who believe in free will.
But we all live as if free will exists
and we all have to live as if we are
accountable for our actions. Otherwise,
society falls apart. But if deep down we
know that that that really there is no
free will. I I mean the most extreme
examples are in a sense the easiest to
see it. What a psychopath is is not just
a murderer but it's a murderer who is
cunning and who plans coldly their
killing. They choose to kill. So you may
say they're the most evil kind. But no
one on this earth has ever chosen to be
a psychopath. It's a condition. You
don't, it's like saying, "Oh, he's an
asthmatic. We must we must we must lock
him up." Well, you don't choose to be
asthmatic. You don't choose to be
psychopathic. The case of psychopathic,
you're harming a lot of people and
causing misery. So, clearly, we've got
to find a way of removing them from from
the natural orbit of humanity. But,
[snorts] you know, it's this I don't
really what I'm talking about, but I'm
having fun.
On that point, on that point of the
psychopath, how how possible do you
think it is to really change
um
who we are. It's a bit of a strange
question, but at our very core,
good question.
Past the age of, you know, 18, you know,
the the imprints have been made into our
character, our identity, our sense of
being, our search for validation as
you've described and I've seen through
your story and mine, how possible is it
to change who we are and are we anybody
or are we just a byproduct of our sort
of DNA and our experiences?
That's such a good point. I mean we are
in in that sense we are a story and a
story is a is um a mixture of of of
different elements. Um and
a story is a myth. It's it doesn't
happen. You know it's a bit I'm sure
you've read the the novel Harrari that
wonderful chapter where he just he sort
of proves that Peugeot doesn't exist.
It's a myth. You know it has a symbol.
It has a people working for it but there
is no such thing as Persia. There's a
Peugeot car, but that's not Peugeot. And
and and so on. And similarly, there is
us. Um now, if I cut my toe off, I'm
still Steven. I'm just Steven when I'm
missing a toe. If I cut my head off, I'm
dead. So, obviously, you know, I'm the
remains of Steven. But if uh if I start
cutting more and more bits, when do I
stop being myself? It it's it's it's
such a an extraordinary idea. We're
aware of our own self and unless we have
particular problems on the
neurodiversity scale, for example, uh we
also fully understand other people's
selves and that they have a self and
that therefore they have their own will
and their own desire and the chances are
their appetites will be similar to ours.
So, you know, if we're both not eaten
for a day and someone brings in a tray
and there's a a cake on it, we'll look
at each other and we'll know we each
want that cake. You know, we've
projected into the other's mind. I mean,
in the most simple way, theory of mind,
you know, shows us that. Um, but uh
[gasps]
what that self is, how it can be in any
way [snorts] quantified,
it can't be removed from the body as far
as we know. I mean, obviously there are
superstitions and people talk about
astral projection and so on, but there's
no evidence that's ever been done. Um,
you can in a metaphysical way reach
yourself into other people's selves even
after you're dead. Shakespeare does that
every day to different people reading
his sets or or or Jimmyi Hendris or John
Lennon does. Who whoever you know I'm
reached by David Bowie when I turn on
Starman. I feel his self is connecting
with me. His art, yes, his poetry, his
vision, but also the self. He talks to
you. That's what art does. And and and
in that sense, you are immortal. Indeed,
that was Shakespeare's obsession. So
long as men can live and eyes can see,
so long lives this. And this gives life
to thee. You know, he was aware that
there is there is a way that we
communicate beyond language. um the the
actual sound in the throat of of words
being said, vibrating the ear is one way
for language to get into us. The other a
very recent invention only 5,000 years
is is reading characters on a page uh uh
um and writing them. Uh but the but the
other way is is more is harder to
understand, isn't it? But we do connect
with people who are dead, who are away
from us, um whom we remember. And there
are their self is as real without a body
as the self of someone who has a body.
So in that sense there is an
immortality, but it's held together by
communal memory and by means of
communication like print. And and if
they die then the the selves of the past
die as well don't they?
Since you were a young man at the core
of you what do you think has actually
changed if I went to the very core of
you and I could I could see it I don't
know and I hold it in my hand what would
be different at the very core of you
between the age of you know 20 25 and
today let's say
I think I'm much calmer I think I'm more
accepting of things.
Um,
I feel less need
to prove myself. It may not sound like
that the way I've been rattling on. Um,
I I of course have found um a kind of
permanent love. I kind of that's very
ungracious, but I got married nearly
eight years ago. Um, and that that has
changed things to be married, especially
talking about that child early on who
knew he was gay and and saw ahead of him
only a life of exile and shame. The the
the prospect that I could ever actually
be married and live happily and and for
it to be of no big deal to anybody. I
mean, there must be people, I suppose,
in the world who think it's disgusting,
but you don't often bump into them. Um,
so that that's made a big difference.
And uh I'm ambitious only for an ex if
there's an exciting project like this
film. I told you I'm learning Polish uh
at the moment to to to to to be in a
film. And I'm I'm very excited and
ambitious about the film. Not because I
want it to win awards and be a huge
success, but because I really am. I
haven't done anything quite like it for
a very long time. And so that's a
thrill. Um, and otherwise I, you know, I
suppose I just I don't need I don't need
to connect to people in the way I used
to. I used to be slight I really shy
enough to need cocaine to stay up at
night and to go to parties. There was,
you know, quite a few years of that.
15 years.
15 years of that. You've done far too
much research, haven't you? But yeah,
and and I mean I look back at it and I
think I I cannot believe I was such an
ass. But on the other hand, there are
friendships I made that I don't regret
and things I discovered and learned
about myself and so on. But mostly of
course it was a very very wrong course.
Fortunately, not a fatally wrong course
either in literal terms or in terms of
career. But um I realized that I am a
very very quiet domestic soul. I don't
like going out. I don't like parties. I
I I I said I said to my husband a couple
of years ago, I said, "I don't think
I've ever met a person or read about a
person that I hate as much as I hate
parties." He [laughter] said, "That's a
bit strong. Do you hate parties more
than you hate Hitler?" I said, "Well,
suppose [laughter] that was just a sort
of weird moment." And I do go to
parties, but I don't.
Standing up talking to people with a
drink in my hand is just my idea of
agony. Because I tell you another secret
which you may have uncovered but it's an
embarrassing one is that I have a
condition called proopagnosia.
It means face blindness. It means I will
see you in the street two days time and
I will blank you because I won't
recognize you I'm afraid. And and it's
absolutely
heart and gut-wrenching because you are
convinced that people think you're
looking down at them and you don't care
about them. You haven't bothered to
remember them because they're
unimportant to you. And it really isn't
that. I remember names all the time.
Most people the other way round. They
Yeah. Remember faces but not names. But
I and it it is I I have a little card in
my wallet that says, you know,
proopagnosia society and I give it to
people. I say, "Oh god, I'm so sorry."
But look, believe me, um, you know,
like, so I did an event for mind last
night and there were some wonderful
people in it. I was moderating it the
the the mental health charity and I I
was thinking in the cab on the way home
I said if I see any one of those people
and we had this wonderful conversation
the chances of my recognizing their
faces are so low it's awful and and you
know you teach yourself various things
like the color of what someone's wearing
on a particular day or if they have a
you know you know earring or some sort
of jewelry or something external to the
face but it's a it's a a very odd one.
So that makes parties even more
difficult. As you know, Intel are now
sponsoring this podcast. And last week,
I introduced you to Intel EVO platform,
the badge of approval for high-spec
laptops that pass Intel's own strict
requirements and enable you to be more
productive on the go. As someone who
spends most of their life on the go,
it's Intel Evo that really caught my eye
when we were discussing this
partnership. The idea that Intel gives
your laptop the seal of approval for you
on all things like all day battery life,
fast charging, and high performance
makes my life easier when I'm buying a
new laptop because I know that if it's
got that Intel seal of approval, then
it's going to be able to keep up with
me. They've basically done all the hard
work and research for you and confirmed
it's going to be able to keep up with
your busy life on the go. Head to
intel.co.uk/eo
to find out more about Intel Evo
platform. Also, for a limited time, you
can currently get 15% off all Intel Evo
devices at johnle Lewis.com. The code is
evolv
until December 11th. So, head over to
john lewis.com to check out the Intel
Evo designs and get your 15% off. Terms
and conditions apply. See more details
in the description box. Age 37, you star
in a play,
which again is called Cellmates, I
believe.
That's right. Um, the play gets some
pretty harsh reviews to to say to say
the least from a lot of the big
newspapers as such. Um, and that's
another real low mo moment in [snorts]
your life where
hugely so. [clears throat]
Can you take me back to that moment?
Yeah, it was pretty grim. I mean, I I we
we'd done previews of it in Guilford and
maybe what Guilford and Richmond I think
before coming into the West End into the
Nelcow Theater as it is now, the Aubry
as it was I think. And I was with Rick
Male whom I loved and was sweet and
funny man and he was brilliant and and
charming as always. The rest of the cast
were nice. It was written by Simon Gray,
a British playwright and he also
directed it and I was playing George
Blake, the spy, the British spy, uh, who
was sent to Wormwood Scrubs and then
amazingly escaped. Um,
I was never comfortable in the play and
I was beginning to feel lost in a drift
and deeply unhappy and I couldn't
understand why the play wasn't that much
of a disaster. I mean, the had good
audiences and they applauded at the end
and some people said, "Yeah, I don't
think it's his best play." But it was
lot, you know, it wasn't an absolute
catastrophe, shall we say?
At this point, because it's important
context, you you're well established.
Yes. In your in in writing in
Yes. things like Black Adder and Jeeps
and Worcester and and Fry Lori had
happened and and and my books had been
selling. So I was you know in in the
public eye was well known. Um and anyway
Saturday there was a Saturday night uh I
guess the press night had been on Friday
or something like that. So we then had a
Saturday night and then on Sunday there
were the Sunday papers of which I saw
some some of which were deeply unkind to
me and [snorts] uh and that that did
make a difference. I mean I I've said I
didn't go just cuz I didn't like the
reviews. It wasn't wasn't entirely that
that would have been a bit weak and and
certainly was a weak thing to have done
anyway. But uh it was a whole
concatenation of something wrong in my
head. I just suddenly saw myself as in
the wrong place doing the wrong things
and I wanted to get away from everything
I knew. Uh, and really what I first
wanted to do was to take my life. And I
I did run the car engine in the lockup
garage of of the flat where I was in
London and then realized it was a
catalytic converter and that it wasn't
really going to do much harm to me. And
then there was stuff of it and I was
just coughing a bit and um uh and and
that's quite a significant decision to
make following
I know. I know. I just wanted out
really. That's it. I just wherever I was
I wanted to be somewhere else and and if
it was nowhere that would be that would
be at first that was the most perfect
place to be. I just didn't see the as
anybody listening who's had the
misfortune and the terror of considering
taking their life suicidal ideiation as
it's known in the trade as it they will
probably concur with me that there comes
a moment where you just start saying to
yourself what's the point? It's a
strange phrase because you know you
could say anyone could say it at any
point but there's some moments when when
you say it it seems so truthful there is
simply no point in anything around
oneself and that's how it seems. Uh
anyway, so I got in the car and drove to
the south coast to
Dover, I think it was, or no, Folkston,
and got on a
a ferry to Zbrugger in in Belgium and
then ended up in Bruge in Bruge like uh
[laughter]
like Colin Farrell Brendan. And um I uh
then wandered a little further east into
Holland and then into Germany and
Hanover and Hamburg.
And you didn't tell anybody you you
No. No. And this was 93 or so. There was
no worldwide web as such. It was just
beginning to happen. Tim Bernersley in
Switzerland was beginning to develop the
the the worldwide web. There were these
things [snorts] these these things
called commercial online servers like
CompuServe and America Online rather
than direct kind of internet connections
and [gasps]
I had been connected to those for for
some time and I'd taken my computer with
me I guess. So, I was in a hotel in
Hamburg
and then I got a message from my friend
Hugh who said, "Old fellow, you must
come home." Um, be in touch at least.
And so I kind of sent him an email on
this computer thing and
[gasps and sighs]
I agreed that the it was nonsense. I had
this in my head this idea that I would
go up from Hamburg and Hanover up
Schlloik Holstein which is the border
with Denmark and go up into Denmark and
somehow in the north of Denmark I would
sit on a rock in a thick white pullover
with a pipe clenched between my teeth
writing impossible poetry and teaching
English to to to Danes and be forgotten
you know and just live the rest of my
life there. Total fantasy. [snorts] Um,
but no, Hugh Hugh said, "Come on, it's
fine. Come home. We really want to see
you. Everyone wants to." Uh, and so I I
drove back overnight to to Amsterdam and
my father had had got a flight to Skipol
and we we met in a hotel in in in Skipol
and um then got a flight little little
airplane back to to South End.
What did you say to your father that day
in Amsterdam when you met him? I said,
"You you you've spent your life getting
me out of terrible and embarrassing
holes, and this is probably the worst of
them." And he said, "No, it isn't. It's
fine. It's all okay." And he was just
wonderful.
I watched a news report of your um
absence.
Really?
Yeah. Yeah, I watched it upstairs before
we had this conversation of the I think
it was maybe BBC News or one of the big
stations reporting that
you had uh you you were basically
missing a big picture of you on the
screen and saying that you had
you know the way that they had framed it
obviously is they said you did this play
they showed some of the headlines some
of the reviews and they said he's Steven
Fry's vanished.
Oh my god.
Um and everyone was very
course I never saw any of that. I did
see a photograph someone sent me years
later of police on the roof of my house
in Norfolk and which was slightly
disturbing looking for signs of me and
obviously feeling the worst. [sighs] Ah,
it was a strange event, but in some ways
it was a a cleansing or a a necessary
step, I suppose. Uh, because as a result
of it, I went to see psychiatrists and
started to try and work out why
why my mind was taking me into such
impossible dark places or um, you know,
when I had so much to be thankful for. I
mean, what the hell? You know, I I had
enough money. I was well regarded in my
profession. Um what why should I come to
such a crisis just because someone
didn't like my performance in that play
is not really good enough. Um and and
I'm not that hyper sensitive. Um, so I
that started what I suppose we have to
call my journey into my mental health
and um, and a few years later, can't
remember when, well, quite a few years
later, probably about eight or nine if
not 10 years later, I made a program at
the BBC or two two uh, episodes I think
it was called The Secret Life of the
Manic Depressive
uh, in which I tried to explore this
this peculiarity of this darkness that
can shroud her mind so completely, but
also that it's part of a of an illness
that I hadn't really understood. I'd
heard the phrase manic depression, and
I'd never really heard the word manic.
Um, manic depression is is two
illnesses. Depression, which is a dark
depressed, lowered, as in depressed
state. And mania is is an elevated state
of energy and and full of full of bounce
and vigor and and a desire to
communicate with people. And depression
is the exact opposite. You just want to
line bend, pull the duvet over your head
and never speak to anybody. [snorts]
Whereas when you're in a manic state,
you're always on the phone boring
people. So there are two poles and hence
it's also known bipolar. There's the the
the one pole of of of mania, hyper
mania, and the other pole of a of a
depressed state. And so I wanted to find
out more about it. And that's where I
went back to school and discovered that
the psychiatrist when I was a boy had
written bipolar question mark. And I
discovered that so many people lived
with this problem. And I also discovered
something quite extraordinary because I
asked everyone I spoke to. I I did a
little button with my finger. I said,
"I'm drawing a button on this table with
my finger. If you press this button, you
will never get a depressed episode
again. One of those awful, terrible,
depressed episodes. But nor will you get
a manic episode. One of those
heightened, elevated, jubilant episodes.
Um, do you want to press the button?"
And almost none of them wanted to press
the button. And it and and it it
reminded me of a thing that WHord, the
poet, had written about, don't take my
devils away or my angels will fly away
too. And and I don't know whether that's
a true thing, but it's a fear that we
have inside us that even an illness like
like manic depression and how serious it
can be is part of us and and gives us a
a secret power, gives us something
extra. Um it's dangerous because because
it is um highly the word doctors uses is
morbidity in in other words, you know,
pe people especially if it's
undiagnosed. If you start finding that
you're crashing in moods and becoming
miserable and and and everyone's finding
you a pain in the ass or you're
absolutely wild and full of crazy plans
and, you know, buying things, you know,
going on shopping sprees or being
sexually exhibitionist or inappropriate
and people find that even more annoying.
Um, and if you don't know that it's
actually an illness, then you just mask
it with alcohol and and narcotics of one
kind or another, and they mask it pretty
successfully, but they have their own
problems, to say the least, and people
can then slide down, leave their
families, their families can no longer
tolerate their their substance abuse,
for example, and they they end up on the
streets. And then there's a lot of
discovery for them to know that they
first have to get off the substances.
that have been masking the problem and
then to face the problem and and it's a
really as we know now a huge endemic
problem it seems in in in our culture
and country amongst young people. It's
expressed with a rash of self harm that
is is just so so upsetting to see
[snorts] children hurting themselves and
and and if you ask them why they do it
it's always the same answer is it's to
dis to displace the other pain inside
them. It's because the pain in there is
worse. So you do that to take away from
it. And that for a child is is just
heartbreaking to imagine
post diagnosis of um manic manic
depression.
What were you advised to do and what did
you do to make life better with the
understanding now and the awareness that
you had this condition? Well, firstly, I
went on a sort of uh exploratory journey
of of medication. Um, my psychiatrist
tried me on a number of things. Um,
sodium valprate, which has since become
somewhat somewhat [snorts] of a of a
disgraced pharmaceutical, particularly
when when it's been given to people with
um various forms of epilepsy. Um, and
then lithium, and I was on lithium for
for quite a number of years. and and
then slowly I became aware of some
[snorts] of the kind of folk wisdom that
has been around in our species for a
very long time but which was initially
very irritating. I'll give you an
example. Um there certain kinds of
people who if they hear someone's
depressed say well go go and walk it off
you know just go for a nice walk and you
think hang on this is an illness just
saying go and walk it off and yet once
you've confronted it and once you've
tried to control it once you've
understood what it is uh a chronic
condition i.e bit like asthma or or
diabetes, something that's with you and
that may not go away and may come back
again and isn't necessarily under your
control. You then do discover that there
are therapies in life like exercise,
gardening, making music, knitting. I
mean it doesn't almost matter what it
is. It is like, as I say, a folk wisdom
of taking yourself out of yourself and
[snorts]
also believing in a future. It's
incredibly important. First thing I did
I think that was a breakthrough for me
was that I lost some weight. I mean I'm
always fighting weight but I was really
pretty pretty big back then and I
managed to lose about four stone. Now
it's not that losing four stone is in
itself a vast achievement but it tells
me that I can control some part of
myself. My physical body is not is not a
rogue that will look just do whatever it
wants to do. I can say no, I'm going to
make you a bit sleeker. And if I can do
that with my body, maybe I can do things
with my mind. Maybe I am, you know,
[snorts] captain of my soul, master of
my destiny, and all of that. So, yes, I
started walking every morning, uh, you
know, when I was in London, go around
Regent's Park and listen to audio books,
just choose all kinds of books that
either I hadn't read for years or I'd
always meant to read, you know, whether
it was Dstoyki or Agatha Christie. It
wasn't about uh high literature
necessarily. It was about just having a
story in my head and walking and walking
and looking and saying, "Wow, I did
seven miles this morning. That's
amazing." You feel you're doing
something. So, it's really been a slow
process of allowing myself, I suppose,
to to to be who I am and not to fight
for my place at the table. I I suppose
I've accepted that um through immense
good fortune, I am where I am. I don't
need to say yes to everything that I'm
asked to do. I don't owe it to the, you
know, to to myself to to have to work
all the time. Um, and so I am sometimes
capable of saying looking to myself in
the mirror and saying, "You you're quite
happy today, aren't you, Stephen?" And
then I'll go, "No, don't say that. It's
the worst thing you could say." [snorts]
You've got almost 13 million followers
on Twitter. M
what's your relationship been with
social media because you know
up and down
I mean Twitter really is a cesspool at
the best of times just negativity and
abuse and trolls
so reflecting on the you know the
experience you had when you were 37 with
that critical feedback I mean Twitter is
not
not a great place to be if you want
No indeed it isn't I mean it is
supportive too I mean I I've learned how
to use it in a way that is not likely
ever to upset me anymore there was a
time when I was fully engaged with it
and yeah you call it a cesspool and and
I've used similar images in the early
days it was like a lovely swimming hole
in the in a in a in a in a in a glade in
a in a lovely wood somewhere where
people of good will and from from around
swim about and you'd bump into them and
go hi how are you and you just chat and
then suddenly you notice oh there's a
turd floating on it [laughter] what the
hell's that doing there and then
suddenly there'd be a bit of broken
glass when you put your foot down and or
an old rusty pram or something and you
realize that it had become as you say a
kind of sispool and and that's a
terrible shame. It's immensely useful to
have that many followers because it
means you know I can satisfy a few
publicity requirements with one stroke
of the pen as it were just by by
tweeting about them and it will reach a
bigger audience than if I spend four
hours doing a profile with a journalist
who who always want to get under my skin
and ask annoying questions. So, it's a
lazy good publicity uh tool. Um I'm I'm
slightly worried uh that that I don't
know that I may have to leave it if Elon
Musk takes over. I'm not sure that I
want to be involved in his Twitter. It
doesn't sound like a nice
happy place. Um, I I mean I'll consider
I might just simply stop using it in any
other way except to post things for
charities or or work that that you know,
but rather than engaging in people, I
just I'm not sure I want to see some of
the tweets that float up from the kind
of people that [laughter] Musk
encourages. I mean that I may be wrong
it and it's not that I want it to be a
left-wing thing, not a right-wing thing.
I mean, I'm fully um, of course, aware
that it should reflect society. uh as
much as possible. But uh um you know
what I wanted to do in sort of way is go
on one of those. Doesn't Pierers Morgan
do something? Is it GB News? He does or
one of those things.
Yes.
Um and I've sort of wanted to go on now.
You'll have to hold your ears now. Sort
of want to go. Hello. How are you? You
old [__] It's [__] great to see you
[__] [__] [__] [__] And him to go you
can't say that. Oh, I [laughter] thought
this was the home of free speech. Isn't
it? I thought I thought this is the
[__] home of [__] free speech, but
it isn't. Oh, so free speech is
negotiable. There are bits that you
can't say and bits that you can, you
know, cuz that's that's the point. I
mean, free speech is of course
important, but it's not it's not the end
point. The end point is human beings
living together in peace and harmony and
happiness as much as possible without
war and violence and envy and resentment
and bitterness and or starvation and
poverty and all those sort of things.
That that's the end point.
And it's probable that that end point is
better arrived at if we live in a
society where you're free to speak and
share ideas and think freely and you're
not told what to say. So in that sense,
free speech is very much one of the key
things on the way to it. But for some
people, key speech has become the end
point.
I want to live in a society where I can
say anything. Doesn't matter if people
are starving and the gap between rich
and poor is wider than it's ever been.
Uh the only thing that matters is I can
say what I want. Well, that's that. I
just don't think that's what John
Stewart Mill and all the [snorts]
original figures who wrote on liberty
and free speech. I don't think that's
quite what they meant and I don't think
it's what I see as the the you know the
be all and end all but um so you know
I'm worried that
there will be a rise in the kinds of
anti- you know kind of racist and
transphobic and and indeed anti-feminist
on the other side and all kinds of other
nastiness will prevail and
Musk will go yeah that's that's That's
what we call free speech. I'm a free
speech absolutist. He called himself.
It is. It I mean it is concerning. It is
concerning generally. I I've made the
decision that I just don't I don't
tweet. So I just post the podcast when
it comes out and that's it
because you know it's a losing battle.
You referred to like pieces of [__]
floating past in the in the once lovely
lake and then a piece of glass. I'll end
up having an argument with a piece of
[__] and I don't or a piece of glass and
I just don't want to.
I I think what what what I think of is
like if if at school you're um captain
of the chess club and you put the team
up on the notice board and you pin it up
on the notice board and you then go
away.
What you don't do is put the notice up
and then hide behind a pillar and listen
to how people respond to it. Oh, I see
the ch Oh, what's he put that up for?
He's a wanker, isn't he? And all that,
you know, I mean, just put your notice
up and walk away. Yeah. And now to the
credit of Twitter, you can have settings
where one of the settings I have on my
Twitter feed is that I can't see any
tweets person tweets directed at me from
anybody who hasn't got an email address
verified, hasn't got a phone number
verified, doesn't have a profile
picture.
Brilliant.
So I I don't get many tweets because,
you know, it filters out a lot of the
the stuff. So my my notifications are
are [clears throat] pretty nice. You
know, they're pretty straightforward and
it's because in the past it has been a
distraction. I don't want to fall into
holes, you know, and spend hours of my
life wasted trying to chase down a
troll.
Um,
exactly.
With this journey of mental health, I
know you're you're the president of
Mind, I believe, which is a phenomenal
charity that everybody
um everybody probably knows for for the
work they've done and the important work
they've done over the last decade is
mental health has risen in public sort
of consciousness. Um I one of the things
that I think about a lot is how the
battles we fight for our entire lives.
There's sometimes a frustration around
our inability to cure ourself of those
things. So you know I sit here with
people or I speak to young people and
even in my own life I've come to realize
that a lot of my like real deep battles
maybe they'll never come a day where
they're cured with my traumas. you know,
the ways that I react to certain thing,
my triggers, maybe they'll never be
cured.
Um, and as I read through your story,
even up until 10 years ago, I could see
that you were still having moments of
real lows. Yeah.
Real depressive lows. You know, I
listened to, I think, a podcast episode
you did where you said when you were 55,
it was your, I believe, your third
suicide attempt in your life.
Yes, afraid so. That's right. Yeah. No,
no, I think I mean it is in that sense
what doctors call chronic like asthma.
you you can, you know, have an inhaler
on you and usually be sort of safe and
you know what you're allergic to, what
triggers an asthma attack, but you never
stop being an asthmatic. And the day
could come when you least expect it,
when of course it's always the day
you've forgotten your inhaler, where
suddenly you just get this enormous
attack and you can barely breathe. And
it might have been 10 years since you
last had such one. I'm sure anyone
listening who has lived with asthma will
know know what I mean. And and it's a
bit like that with with with you know
you you
at your peril do you think you've
conquered it. [snorts] You you living
with it and coping with it and managing
it. And most of the time one manages it.
But sometimes you you hear it the the
the the you know the the hoof beatats uh
back in the in your brain of of the
coming storm. and you do everything you
can to avoid it and tell friends. Now, I
mean, that's it's so much easier said
than done. I I I have a a theory. I call
it my genital wart theory is we we all
say how important friends are. Gosh, we
need friends. Friends are the people you
can say anything to, aren't they? But
actually, they're not. If you had a
genital wart,
um you wouldn't show it to your best
friend. You say, "Oh, oh, Tom, hey, have
a look at my blond feet." they would go
shut up. Similarly, you wouldn't show it
to your mother, you know, or to your
sister, [laughter] you know, and that's
family. But you show it to a stranger, a
doctor. So, can you look at this and
tell me if it's normal or all right? And
they go, "Oh, that's fine. Don't worry."
And you feel okay. So, if that's true of
some little physical part of yourself,
it's also true of the mental part of
yourself that although you have family
and friends who are supposed to be there
for you, it's actually very difficult,
even though you know it's the right
thing to do to share with them what
you're thinking. It's very hard and
they'll be upset nearly always when when
you have a crisis if it it gets as far
as suicide obviously even more so. But
any they say why didn't you come and
tell me they're actually angry with you.
You know I'm there for you. Why didn't
you come? Well because I was a general
water in my mind as it were and and you
just feel and [snorts] you have to try
and overcome that. But yes, it it I have
to be aware it won't necessarily go
away. It's it's um the the other thing I
often say is it's like the weather and
and and
um the weather is real. You know, you
can't ever say, "So, I'm going out. It's
not really snowing and it's not a
blizzard outside. I'm going to wear a
t-sh t-shirt." You you have to accept
that the weather is real. But you also
have to accept that you didn't cause it.
I didn't make it snow. It's it and and
nor do you have to sort of welter in the
problem of thinking, well, that's it.
It's snowing now. Going to snow for the
rest of my life. It's always going to be
cold. It will actually pass. Again,
nothing to do with you. You can't make
it pass. And it's those are the storms
in your head. The mistake is not to
think it's real. I'm just imagining it.
No, it's really raining in your head. It
is. Oh, what did I do to make it do
this? You didn't make it rain. It's not
your fault. And oh, it'll never go now.
It will. Some will come out. You don't
know when. It's not under your control.
Those are three things. They're not
absolutely hoay, but they're just enough
if you cling on to them to make you
realize sort of what's going on that
it's out of your control that it's real
and that it will pass.
And what is the mind? You talked about
the hooves of the horse coming.
Is there is there words associated with
with those moments? Is because you said
earlier on about what's the point?
What are the narrative?
That is often the one. What is the
point? And it's also just a
it's like I mean all of us who who have
had it and I'm sure many of the people
listening will have different you know
metaphors and comparisons. It's it is
like something being sucked out of your
sort of energy suck and and that you
feel drained and you're convinced your
face has gone white and sometimes you
look in the mirror and it has gone
white. There has been a physical
response to it that you're utterly white
and people who love you and know you
well see it in your eyes straight away.
So, so my husband will say, "Whoa,
what's the matter?" I'll go, "I don't
know. I don't know. I'm just going to go
and lie down. I just don't know." And
he'll he would have seen it instantly.
And I look at them myself in the mirror
and think, "What what is he seeing?" It
is a common thing. And I noticed this
during the um during the uh the
documentary. uh if you take a magazine
and you know cover half your face and
look at your right eye and then cover
the other half and look at your left eye
or even take a photograph with in that
way and then look it it's amazing how I
found people with who have had mental
health histories that have not been
happy have a often have a more extreme
difference in their left and right eye
that if you look at my left and right
eye one is rather cold and calculating
and one is warm warmer and friendlier.
That's usual with people, I think. I
don't know any empirical science behind
it, but I did notice that almost
everybody I interviewed had an extreme
version of that. And I don't know what
that means or whether it's anyone's ever
ever [clears throat] done any research
onto it, but there are, you know, there
are signs and signals that come. Um,
uh, it's, you know, like some people get
I get itchy under the chin when I'm
going to have an asthma attack, for
example. Get unmistakably itchy under
the chin. But with with mania, which is
often worse, I mean, I interviewed
someone who with with mania, you want to
concentrate, you want new projects,
you've got amazing ideas in your head,
you're risktaking and entrepreneurial
and grandiose. Um and and I interviewed
someone in America who who I interviewed
the wife that the the husband sadly did
take his own life and so I was talking
about life with him and she said it's a
terrible thing to say she said but I was
always happier when he was depressed
than when he was manic. When when he's
depressed he's just you know lying
curled up in a ball. Obviously I didn't
realize he was going to take his life to
go that far. That but when someone's
manic they are just out of control. They
are so embarrassing. They would do such
weird things. She said, she said,
"You'll laugh, but it was awful at the
time." He had a car, a nice car. It's
like a one of the original Mustangs or
something. And he took it apart piece by
piece on a large piece of cloth in his
garage, as an American would say. And
each piece he, you know, he the pencil
or marker, he did a little mark for
where that piece goes and he wrote what
the name of the piece was. So the whole
thing and he started chroming all the
bright work and making it all perfect
and the all the engine parts were out
and then he had a change of state
uh and it moved away from this
optimistic bright mania and he just
kicked the cloth and all the pieces and
everything just piled into a heap of
junk and the car couldn't be rescued.
And there's a sort of metaphor for
something there. I don't know what it is
but she said that you know that that
that's the problem. But when I've had
mania, I had a a manic episode right in
the middle of someone's memorial. It was
quite extraordinary. And and it
frightened me because the power of it
was so intense. And I I I ran home and I
called my doctor, my psychiatrist,
Billy, and I said, "Billy, I'm I have to
tell you, I've had visions and I feel
the closest I can describe it to is like
Jon of Arc. I feel irradiated by some
extraordinary power and light. It's the
most extraordinary thing and I I just
don't know what I'm going to do. He
said, "I'm coming around." [laughter]
He came around and he said, "This is a
very dangerous day." he could see me and
I had I had done I'd started cooking and
I'd started um tidying the I' done three
different jobs and the cooking thing I'd
done a plate with quail's eggs halved um
so elegantly around the edge of the
plate and it was so beautiful
everything's amazing I said I don't know
why you've come I have never been
happier and more in charge of myself he
said no you're not well you are really
not well I can see you he said your eyes
are absolutely kind of off the scale and
I want you just to take this and he gave
me some uh what was it called? Um it'll
it'll come to me it and it sort of calms
you down. It's an antiscychotic
essentially I suppose or an anxolytic or
something like that. That was that was
one of the more extreme manic moments
I'd had and and actually was pretty
frightening because it took me a long
time to get down from it and and I am
the last person in the world to say that
I feel like Jonavar, [laughter] you
know, like someone who has had some
extraordinary transcendent, you know,
religious experience. Um, but that's
that's how I felt.
You've you've accomplished so many
unbelievable things in your career in
spite of all of these struggles that
that we've talked about. Um, the list is
actually too long for me to to even I
wouldn't know where to start. Um, as I
look down onto this little iPad in front
of me at all of the milestones, the the
books, the the roles you've played, the
the scripts you've written, etc.
Why? Why and how? Why and how you you
know and it's always a difficult
question because and it requires us to
abandon humility for a second
potentially and and say something nice
about oneself but why why you
I think the first reason and it would be
the same if you spoke to a certain kind
of musician is because I write and and I
have always written since I was a little
boy I used to write stories and when I
then was at Cambridge and there was this
thing of comedy it was natural as with
Hugh and on my own to write monologues
and sketches to perform and because I'd
written them I I sort of wrote them for
myself to perform but the writing was at
the bottom of it all. Um, and then
acting jobs on their own came along
which I didn't write or other people
wrote or I could just sort of add bits
of writing to. But I was always a writer
and if you look at musicians
the reason we venerate Bowie and Elton
John and you know Lennon Cohen whoever
they write their music doesn't matter
how fantastic their voices are. Yes, we
love Nack King Cole or someone who is
just a beautiful voice. But the pantheon
of great artists are those who create
their own work by they write it. They
write the songs. They last forever. If
you write the song, Paul McCartney or
whatever, you know, I mean, you just
think even something like when you see
that postcode lottery and that who's
that knocking at my door and you think
that's Paul McCartney when he wrote that
cannot have been thinking. But he wrote
he and every day he writes to this day
because it's that's what he is. That
somehow that's the voice in him telling
him that's what real work is is the
writing and the creating. And I love
acting and I love presenting and um
reading audio books and and things like
that. Immense fun, but the real work is
always sitting in front of the blinking
cursor and and and and writing things.
Um, and everything else is is gravy and
fantastic gravy at that. Not because
it's easier. Um, and and you know, I'm
not sort of saying acting is easy. It's
just for some reason in my head, you
know, the Protestant work ethic, the
Jewish work ethic, call it what you
like, is the one that says, you know,
sitting alone, concentrating until
bubbles of blood fall come out of your
ears. That's work.
Acting, as Shakespeare called it, is
play. He was a playwright and he called
actors players.
Do you think we're all artists?
This is a really good question and I
always used to say no. I I I was very
friendly in their heyday. Well, I still
am uh uh with for example Damian Hurst
in in in the ' 90s. I was very much an
obituary as a Groucho Club and uh and
and and you know the Tracy Emmens and
the um and the Damian Hurst would come
in along with the Oasises and the Blurs
and and so on. It was very much the the
the place where those incredibly
energetic and and new kinds of artists
were would assemble. And you know, I'd
get drunk with uh Damian a lot. And I
would sometimes say, I want to be an
artist. And he'd say, "You are an
artist. Anybody could be an artist." I
said, "No, they can't." He said, "What
do you mean?" I said, "And I would say,
I'm an I'm an entertainer. I'm frankly a
bit bourgeoa. I I want to please people,
and if I don't please them, I get upset.
I' I've done it wrong. For for me, the
aim is to see delight in the face. But
for you, it's to make something that
matters to you. And if it disgusts
people or horrifies them, you can you're
often full of glee. It's not you
deliberately make them to hate it. There
are enough people who love it to make
you extremely rich. The time he was only
slightly rich, but now of course he's
worth a huge amount. Uh and I said
that's what a real artist is. And my
other artist friends, not not all from
that same generation. Maggie Hamling is
a wonderful [snorts] painter uh in
Suffuk and she's done my portrait
several times or whatever and she's a
real artist. There's a toughness about
her, a refusal to compromise, an
absolute
what's central is her and her work. And
that's true of artists. Artists are
bloody minded. They bite the hand that
feeds them. I'm pretty easygoing. Uh if
a, you know, a commissioner wants me to
do something, I'll ask him how how he'd
like it done. I'll try and put my my own
voice into it, my own tone into it, but
I don't have the artistic drive to make
it something out of me. There's a
fantastic confidence and supreme
almost contempt for society that artists
have. Um, and that's why they're so
unpopular with the Daily Mails and the
bourgeoa people because they don't
please. They don't provide what is
comfortable or easy and what people
would like or pretty or you know it's
always oh doesn't disgusting of throwing
a pot of paint into the public's face
that was said 150 years ago. Um you know
it's always been thus and artists are
special I think. Um, I [snorts] mean I
like makers or craftsmen, artisans, you
know, that that who who make beautiful
things, whether it's shoes or, you know,
Tom Daily knitting a nice pullover,
whatever it might be, is is a beautiful
thing to see. But art is, to me at
least, and it may be part of the kind of
education I've had and that has
privileged art above all things, but art
is special to me and it has a special
place and does special things. Um it
usually very simple and and that's the
that's the genius of an artist. We die.
We the flesh this case we have dies and
rots and we know this and mostly we
don't particularly like to be reminded
of it. Artists find it the most
fascinating thing in the world. So even
if it's Van Go with showing the petals
falling off the sunflower, there's death
in there. And as for Francis Bacon and
indeed uh uh Damian Hurst and and and
and almost all painters, they paint
death. They paint the truth about what
we are becoming. And painting is
sometimes the last bastion against
death. I'm going to make something
permanent because everything else dies.
That's again to Shakespeare's sonets.
You know, this will last. Everything
else will die, but this poem will stay
here. I made something permanent against
death, decay, entropy, all the horrors
of of the universe that that drag us
down. You know, my nipples are dropping
two inches every year as as gravity
takes hold and it will for all of us
[laughter]
and and art keeps them propped up, if
you like.
[snorts]
I I very much I've been going back and
forth about this point about art because
I've realized as probably as I've got
older that um expression in some
artistic form whether it's knitting that
jumper like Tom Daly does is so great
for our mind.
Absolutely. and and um you know you've
talked about a few things there even
when you're talking about social
prescribing just some way to express
oursel through the medium of music or
painting or creation seems to be
it seems to be so human and so innately
um important to to all of us
um
but at the same time I hear what you're
saying
regarding artists and their conviction
to create from their own perspective
versus to conform
I guess I guess maybe the difference
there is that's a being a great artist.
[laughter]
Yes, I think it's true. Yeah, there are
there are qualities and degrees.
There's a spectrum of
I mean there are there people have tried
to define I mean an artisan, a craftsman
can make the same thing again and again
identically and it's genius, you know,
they're making four chairs. Each chair
is is the same. An artist never does the
same thing again. They they might have a
theme that they do. So you you know you
can get a lot of artists who you know uh
who who who who like to paint a
particular subject. Um whether it's
Bedlingfield terriers famous Scottish
artists used to do Craig Herson um um he
liked to do little Bedlington Terriers
and he liked there's usually a star
somewhere but everyone is different.
everyone is a is a variation on a theme
whereas an artisan is happy to make
things that are perfect and the same
each time. Uh a craftsman and but
they're both good for the mind. In fact,
probably being a craftsman is better for
the mind. [snorts] There's I remember
Rowan Atkinson said to me once years
ago, he's a very wise man indeed and
thinks a lot, very [snorts] very very
thoughtful and and he said and I'm sure
he wasn't the first to say it and there
are many different names for this. He
said, "But it only ever works on stage
if you are relaxed."
But it only ever works on stage if you
are concentrating.
If you concentrate without being
relaxed, you're just stiff and you're
trying too hard. If you relax without
concentrating, you're all over the
place. But when both happen at once, you
are master of time and space, and you
are in control. You're concentrating on
every detail and every second of the
audience's response, and your timing is
perfect, and yet you are relaxed enough
to allow them to enjoy it without
feeling any strain. Sportsmen call that
being in the zone.
Um, and and it's immensely important uh
to get that blend. And one of the ways
to create it is, I think, not to do art
because that's just too frightening, but
to do crafts and and that can include
painting. It can be painting by numbers.
It can be just a general sketch where
you're not trying to make it art. But
once your tongue is stuck out, you know,
you've got that concentrated but relaxed
on you. And it can, as I say, it could
be knitting, carpet making, it can be
anything you choose, but something or a
jigsaw even, but something where you've
made a change to what was there before.
You've brought materials together that
weren't there before, and you've done it
in a way that has just given you that
you've listened to the radio or or the
television's on in the corner or you've
got a playlist going and it's it's a
it's a magical thing. flow state.
And and and if if anyone's thinking of
how they might do that, one of my
favorite films is a film called Running
on Empty, a Sydney LT film with River
Phoenix and Jud Hirs and various others
in it. And uh it it's about this family
that are on the run because they
attacked
a weapons laboratory during the Vietnam
War. And unfortunately, there was a
security guard in there who got killed,
although they didn't. They tried to do
it when it was empty. So, they've been
on the lamb from the FBI for like 15 20
years. That's the backstory. [snorts]
Anyway, that means that they're they
they don't have much and they're
constantly having to go on the move when
the FBI might be close. And uh the River
Phoenix's character is a musical genius
as it happens. Not relevant to this
story, but he meets this girl and they
start to fall for each other. And at one
point they're walking along the beach
and he's picking things up and says,
"Oh, this might do." And she says,
"What's that?" And he says, "In our
family, for Christmas or birthdays,
we're only allowed to give something we
found or made."
And I I almost wept at how beautiful an
idea that was. I know it's so obvious.
We live in a ridiculous crass commercial
world where we score everything by its
monetary value. But to say, "We're only
allowed to give each other things we
found or made." And so he'd found this
stone and this piece of wood or
whatever, driftwood, whatever it was,
and he was going to make something out
of it. And his parents would be thrilled
to have it because you've given them
time and concentration, but you've also
had the pleasure yourself of doing the
making. So maybe someone listening will
say to their family, "Hey, Christmas is
coming up. We're only allowed to give
each other things we found and made."
And especially at a time of of of, you
know, financial crisis. Who wants to go
into this slightly sick making nonsense
of just going into shops and spending
vast sums of money that [snorts] you
know on shiny things and uh when you
might just find a piece of driftwood or
something that looks like a hedgehog and
turn it into a pipe holder or a soap
dish or you know that's all I'm saying.
It sounds so cheesy.
No, it's be it's a really really
beautiful idea and it's very much
aligned to
to the relationship I have with my
partner to be honest. We, you know, I'm
sure I'm sure everybody knows I have the
means to buy whatever, but
indeed
I can't think of a recent Valentine's
Day, birthday, just had my birthday
where anything has exceeded the £100
because it's all like scrapbooks and
really sentimental personal stuff. And
thankfully, I'm with someone who wants
that and would actually be probably
disgusted if I got them a shiny thing. I
genuinely I've said [clears throat] this
before, my partner would be genuinely
disgusted if I got a shiny thing or like
a designer thing like the look I would
get, you know? So I I here's a question.
If your if your if the good life in your
own subjective definition of whatever
that means. If the good life your best
life was a I've asked this question, but
I'm going to ask a variation of it to
you was a recipe constituting of a bunch
of different ingredients. M
what do you think you need or is missing
from that list of ingredients for you to
have the dish of a good life?
Wow,
that's an amazing thought. I mean there
is a part of me that obviously feels I
say obviously that feels in another
world if I timed things right and might
have had children and and that's an
experience that an enormous number of my
fellow humans undergo and it clearly
gives pleasure. I have many godchildren
and now [snorts]
nieces and nephews and great nieces and
great nephews. Um, and but I've I'll
never experience the the a child growing
up and and and and that I mean it's
slight certainness. It's um it allows me
fantastic um ironic sarcastic in fact
conversations with people sometimes
where someone goes all this nonsense
about global warming and
I mean, you know, and I'll go, "No, I'm
with you. I don't have children either,
so I don't care what happens to the
world." [laughter] And they'll go,
"Well, no, I've got kids." I said, "Oh,
do you hate them then? You hate your
children, so you don't want them to have
a nice world." Oh, well, I don't I mean,
yeah, that's fine. And they'll go, "Oh,
look, don't be stupid." And I go, "Well,
that's [laughter]
very silly of me, but but it um yeah, I
mean, that's probably the biggest hole
in my in my life experience. I've been
fortunate enough to have done so many
things and to experience so much and met
so many people. I've been thrilled to
meet and had opportunities that that
just unbelievable really. And [snorts]
of course I've had opportunities I
suppose to have had children. I I mean
you know I could have sorted something
out. I could have and you know Elliot
and I could you know we we we talked
about it a bit but we never we never
talked about to the extent of right so
we're going to a clinic tomorrow to talk
this through to some expert you know we
never quite got that far. It was always
just yeah, it would be nice, wouldn't
it? Um [snorts] and uh so that's
probably the I mean otherwise of course
there are there are regrets in life
because
um as you get to I'm now from the 25th
of August nearly your birthday onwards I
was my birth 24th of August. So from
that day onwards I was closer to 70 than
60 because it was my 65th birthday on
the 24th of August. So a [snorts] as you
move towards uh uh the seer the yellow
leaf as Shakespeare put it. Oh so so
embarrassed. Shakespeare calling saying
[clears throat] could you stop quoting
me? Oh it's my sister. It might be
important Joe. Yes. Sorry I'm still at
the um Oh god. Am I late?
Sorry.
[__] I am. Yes you're quite right.
The driver the driver is saying at the
moment he's worried about getting you
back.
The driver is worried about getting me
back in time. I understand.
He's right outside.
Thank you, darling. Bless you. We're
having such a good time. I had no idea
how the time was passing.
Please give my love to Mr. Bartlett.
Hello, Joe. [laughter]
Joe loves you, Bartlett.
You're the Butler pair. The juicy Butler
pair. [laughter]
Yeah.
Please apologize for me interrupting. I
know. I know you because you're having a
nice time, but I felt I should do my
duty.
You bet. I really appreciate it. Thanks.
And I'll I'll I'll text them when I'm in
the cab on the way there.
Gosh, I'm sorry. No worries at all. No
worries.
Listen, Stephen, thank you. Thank you so
much for your your time. We do have a
quick closing tradition just where the
last guest asks a question for the next
guest.
That's right.
So, I'll just rattle this one off to
you. Um, and I absolutely can't read
their writing. What is it that motivated
you once you
Do you have any idea?
Already had it. Ah,
what is it that motivate What is it that
motivated you once you already had it?
Oh, do you mean once you've reached a
goal, why do you keep at it?
You got to the point in your life where
you had achieved so much, most people
would be satisfied with retirement and
wrapping it all in. What then became
your motivation in your life?
This the honestly pleasure. The fact
that I still enjoyed it so much that
when I met new people who wanted me to
do a new thing like this this dinosaur
um program, I'm doing dinos. Yeah. Uh
living, you know, doing this new
technology, being with the dinosaurs. so
exciting. It was just a whole new thing
for me. And and I'd never done anything
like it. And so I just said yes. And
even though it meant like am I going to
get how how am I going to get a week to
be in that studio and do this and enough
stuff and prepare for it and so on
turned out to be a wonderful program and
unique kind of technology demonstrating
these dinos. So so that is an example.
It's just and similarly doing this Apple
TV show which I'm doing now in America
called the morning show which is which
is good fun and uh you know just
occasionally it's it's the thrill of the
variation
you know so it's the variation between
doing a documentary and then suddenly
having to spend four or five months just
working on a book and then uh then doing
some [__] piece of uh uh TV or film
with big stars in it uh feeling like,
"Ooh, I'm in Hollywood." You know,
it's [snorts] not that I'm calling the
morning show [__] because that's the
least [__] thing I've ever done.
I've actually had the privilege of
seeing all of the above other than your
upcoming movie, which which hasn't been
shot yet. But when I saw dinosaurs, it
was um it brought me right back to my
childhood and watching Jurassic Park
with awe and as if I was stepping back
in time to a to to a place in in our
history. Thank you so much for your
time, Stephen. I really appreciate it.
You're someone real pleasure. And do I
have to leave a question for your next
question?
If you could, that would be amazing.
going to give you the book that I
oversee you. Thank you, Stephen.
Quick word from one of our sponsors.
I've got a tip for all of you that will
make your virtual meeting experiences, I
think, 10 times better. As some of you
may know by now, Blue Jeans by Verizon
offers seamless, highquality video
conferencing. But the reason why I use
Blue Jeans versus other video
conferencing tools is because of
immersion. Their tools make you feel
more connected to the employees or
customers you're trying to engage with.
And now they're launching one of their
biggest feature enhancements to impact
virtual events so far called Blue Jean
Studio. Actually used it the other day.
I did a virtual event using the studio
which I think about 700 of you came to.
TV level production quality all done by
one person with very little technical
experience on a laptop. So if you've got
an event coming up and you're thinking
about doing it virtually, check out Blue
Jean Studio Now. Let me know what you
think cuz I genuinely believe I know
this is an advert and I'm supposed to
say this, but I genuinely believe it's
the best tool I've seen for doing really
immersive, simple, but high quality
production virtual events. For many
years, people